Page 56
Hitler’s Rise to Power
This crisis in the economy, polity and society formed the background
to Hitler’s rise to power. Born in 1889 in Austria, Hitler spent his
youth in poverty. When the First World War broke out, he enrolled
for the army, acted as a messenger in the front, became a corporal, and
earned medals for bravery. The German defeat horrified him and the
Versailles Treaty made him furious. In 1919, he joined a small group
called the German Workers’ Party. He subsequently took over the
organisation and renamed it the National Socialist German Workers’
Party. This party came to be known as the Nazi Party.
In 1923, Hitler planned to seize control of Bavaria, march to Berlin
and capture power. He failed, was arrested, tried for treason, and
later released. The Nazis could not effectively mobilise popular
support till the early 1930s. It was during the Great Depression that
Nazism became a mass movement. As we have seen, after 1929, banks
collapsed and businesses shut down, workers lost their jobs and the
middle classes were threatened with destitution. In such a situation
Nazi propaganda stirred hopes of a better future. In 1928, the Nazi
Party got no more than 2. 6 per cent votes in the Reichstag – the
German parliament. By 1932, it had become the largest party with
37 per cent votes.
Hitler was a powerful speaker. His passion and his words moved
people. He promised to build a strong nation, undo the injustice of
the Versailles Treaty and restore the dignity of the German people.
He promised employment for those looking for work, and a secure
future for the youth. He promised to weed out all foreign influences
and resist all foreign ‘conspiracies’ against Germany.
Hitler devised a new style of politics. He understood the significance
of rituals and spectacle in mass mobilisation. Nazis held massive rallies
and public meetings to demonstrate the support for Hitler and instil
a sense of unity among the people. The Red banners with the
Swastika, the Nazi salute, and the ritualised rounds of applause after
the speeches were all part of this spectacle of power.
Nazi propaganda skilfully projected Hitler as a messiah, a saviour, as
someone who had arrived to deliver people from their distress. It is
an image that captured the imagination of a people whose sense of
dignity and pride had been shattered, and who were living in a time
of acute economic and political crises.