page 32
2.4 A Turbulent Time: The 1905 Revolution
Russia was an autocracy. Unlike other European rulers, even at the
beginning of the twentieth century, the Tsar was not subject to
Alexander Shlyapnikov, a socialist
worker of the time, gives us a description
of how the meetings were organised:
‘Propaganda was done in the plants and
shops on an individual basis. There were
also discussion circles … Legal meetings
took place on matters concerning [official
issues], but this activity was skilfully
integrated into the general struggle for
the liberation of the working class. Illegal
meetings were … arranged on the spur
of the moment but in an organised way
during lunch, in evening break, in front
of the exit, in the yard or, in
establishments with several floors, on
the stairs. The most alert workers would
form a “plug” in the doorway, and the
whole mass piled up in the exit. An
agitator would get up right there on the
spot. Management would contact the
police on the telephone, but the
speeches would have already been
made and the necessary decision taken
by the time they arrived ...’
Alexander Shlyapnikov, On the Eve of
1917. Reminiscences from the
Revolutionary Underground.
2022-23
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
pg 33
Activity
parliament. Liberals in Russia campaigned to end this state of affairs.
Together with the Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries,
they worked with peasants and workers during the revolution of
1905 to demand a constitution. They were supported in the empire
by nationalists (in Poland for instance) and in Muslim-dominated
areas by jadidists who wanted modernised Islam to lead their societies.
The year 1904 was a particularly bad one for Russian workers. Prices
of essential goods rose so quickly that real wages declined by 20 per
cent. The membership of workers’ associations rose dramatically.
When four members of the Assembly of Russian Workers, which
had been formed in 1904, were dismissed at the Putilov Iron Works,
there was a call for industrial action. Over the next few days over
110,000 workers in St Petersburg went on strike demanding a
reduction in the working day to eight hours, an increase in wages
and improvement in working conditions.
When the procession of workers led by Father Gapon reached the
Winter Palace it was attacked by the police and the Cossacks. Over
100 workers were killed and about 300 wounded. The incident,
known as Bloody Sunday, started a series of events that became known
as the 1905 Revolution. Strikes took place all over the country and
universities closed down when student bodies staged walkouts,
complaining about the lack of civil liberties. Lawyers, doctors,
engineers and other middle-class workers established the Union of
Unions and demanded a constituent assembly.
During the 1905 Revolution, the Tsar allowed the creation of an
elected consultative Parliament or Duma. For a brief while during
the revolution, there existed a large number of trade unions and
factory committees made up of factory workers. After 1905, most
committees and unions worked unofficially, since they were declared
illegal. Severe restrictions were placed on political activity. The Tsar
dismissed the first Duma within 75 days and the re-elected second
Duma within three months. He did not want any questioning of his
authority or any reduction in his power. He changed the voting
laws and packed the third Duma with conservative politicians. Liberals
and revolutionaries were kept out