page 35
In the winter of 1917, conditions in the capital, Petrograd, were grim.
The layout of the city seemed to emphasise the divisions among its
people. The workers’ quarters and factories were located on the right
bank of the River Neva. On the left bank were the fashionable areas,
the Winter Palace, and official buildings, including the palace where
the Duma met. In February 1917, food shortages were deeply felt in
the workers’ quarters. The winter was very cold – there had been
exceptional frost and heavy snow. Parliamentarians wishing to
preserve elected government, were opposed to the Tsar’s desire to dissolve
the Duma.
On 22 Februar y, a lockout took place at a
factory on the right bank. The next day, workers
in fifty factories called a strike in sympathy.
In many factories, women led the way to strikes.
This came to be called the International Women’s
Day. Demonstrating workers crossed from the
factory quarters to the centre of the capital – the
Nevskii Prospekt. At this stage, no political party
was actively organising the movement. As the
fashionable quarters and official buildings were
surrounded by workers, the government imposed
a curfew. Demonstrators dispersed by the evening,
but they came back on the 24th and 25th. The
government called out the cavalry and police to
keep an eye on them.
On Sunday, 25 February, the government
suspended the Duma. Politicians spoke out against
the measure. Demonstrators returned in force to
the streets of the left bank on the 26th. On the
27th, the Police Headquarters were ransacked. The
streets thronged with people raising slogans about
bread, wages, better hours and democracy. The
government tried to control the situation and
called out the cavalry once again. However, the
cavalry refused to fire on the demonstrators. An
officer was shot at the barracks of a regiment and
three other regiments mutinied, voting to join the
striking workers. By that evening, soldiers and
3 The February Revolution in Petrograd
Fig.8 – The Petrograd Soviet meeting in the Duma, February 1917.
2022-23
India and the Contemporary World
page 36
Box 1
Activity
striking workers had gathered to form a ‘soviet’ or ‘council’ in the
same building as the Duma met. This was the Petrograd Soviet.
The very next day, a delegation went to see the Tsar. Military
commanders advised him to abdicate. He followed their advice and
abdicated on 2 March. Soviet leaders and Duma leaders formed a
Provisional Government to run the country. Russia’s future would
be decided by a constituent assembly, elected on the basis of universal
adult suffrage. Petrograd had led the February Revolution that
brought down the monarchy in February 1917.