page 40
4.1 The Civil War
When the Bolsheviks ordered land redistribution, the Russian army
began to break up. Soldiers, mostly peasants, wished to go home for
the redistribution and deserted. Non-Bolshevik socialists, liberals and
supporters of autocracy condemned the Bolshevik uprising. Their
leaders moved to south Russia and organised troops to fight the
Bolsheviks (the ‘reds’). During 1918 and 1919, the ‘greens’ (Socialist
Revolutionaries) and ‘whites’ (pro-Tsarists) controlled most of the
Russian empire. They were backed by French, American, British
and Japanese troops – all those forces who were worried at the growth
of socialism in Russia. As these troops and the Bolsheviks fought a
civil war, looting, banditry and famine became common.
Supporters of private property among ‘whites’ took harsh steps with
peasants who had seized land. Such actions led to the loss of popular
support for the non-Bolsheviks. By January 1920, the Bolsheviks
controlled most of the former Russian empire. They succeeded due
Read the two views on the revolution in the
countryside. Imagine yourself to be a witness
to the events. Write a short account from the
standpoint of:
Ø an owner of an estate
Ø a small peasant
Ø a journalist
2022-23
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
41
Activity
Source B
to cooperation with non-Russian nationalities and Muslim jadidists.
Cooperation did not work where Russian colonists themselves turned
Bolshevik. In Khiva, in Central Asia, Bolshevik colonists brutally
massacred local nationalists in the name of defending socialism. In
this situation, many were confused about what the Bolshevik
government represented.
Partly to remedy this, most non-Russian nationalities were given
political autonomy in the Soviet Union (USSR) – the state the
Bolsheviks created from the Russian empire in December 1922. But
since this was combined with unpopular policies that the Bolsheviks
forced the local government to follow – like the harsh discouragement
of nomadism – attempts to win over different nationalities were
only partly successful.
