Page 8
The Outbreak of the Revolution
Louis XVI had to increase taxes for reasons you have learnt in the
previous section. How do you think he could have gone about doing
this? In France of the Old Regime the monarch did not have the
power to impose taxes according to his will alone. Rather he had to
call a meeting of the Estates General which would then pass his
proposals for new taxes. The Estates General was a political body to
which the three estates sent their representatives. However, the
monarch alone could decide when to call a meeting of this body. The
last time it was done was in 1614.
On 5 May 1789, Louis XVI called together an assembly of the Estates
General to pass proposals for new taxes. A resplendent hall in
Versailles was prepared to host the delegates. The first and second
estates sent 300 representatives each, who were seated in rows facing
each other on two sides, while the 600 members of the third estate
had to stand at the back. The third estate was represented by its more
prosperous and educated members. Peasants, artisans and women
were denied entry to the assembly. However, their grievances and
demands were listed in some 40,000 letters which the representatives
had brought with them.
Voting in the Estates General in the past had been conducted according
to the principle that each estate had one vote. This time too Louis
XVI was determined to continue the same practice. But members of
the third estate demanded that voting now be conducted by the
assembly as a whole, where each member would have one vote. This
was one of the democratic principles put forward by philosophers
like Rousseau in his book The Social Contract. When the king rejected
this proposal, members of the third estate walked out of the assembly
in protest.
The representatives of the third estate viewed themselves as spokesmen
for the whole French nation. On 20 June they assembled in the hall
of an indoor tennis court in the grounds of Versailles. They declared
themselves a National Assembly and swore not to disperse till they
had drafted a constitution for France that would limit the powers of
the monarch. They were led by Mirabeau and Abbé Sieyès. Mirabeau
was born in a noble family but was convinced of the need to do away
with a society of feudal privilege. He brought out a journal and
delivered powerful speeches to the crowds assembled at Versailles.