page 46,47
The Global Influence of the Russian
Revolution and the USSR

Existing socialist parties in Europe did not wholly approve of the
way the Bolsheviks took power – and kept it. However, the possibility
of a workers’ state fired people’s imagination across the world. In
many countries, communist parties were formed – like the
Communist Party of Great Britain. The Bolsheviks encouraged
colonial peoples to follow their experiment. Many non-Russians from
outside the USSR participated in the Conference of the Peoples of
the East (1920) and the Bolshevik-founded Comintern (an international
union of pro-Bolshevik socialist parties). Some received education in
the USSR’s Communist University of the Workers of the East. By
the time of the outbreak of the Second World War, the USSR had
given socialism a global face and world stature.
Yet by the 1950s it was acknowledged within the country that the
style of government in the USSR was not in keeping with the ideals
of the Russian Revolution. In the world socialist movement too it
was recognised that all was not well in the Soviet Union. A backward
country had become a great power. Its industries and agriculture
had developed and the poor were being fed. But it had denied the
essential freedoms to its citizens and carried out its developmental
projects through repressive policies. By the end of the twentieth
century, the international reputation of the USSR as a socialist
country had declined though it was recognised that socialist ideals
still enjoyed respect among its people. But in each country the ideas
of socialism were rethought in a variety of different ways.
Writing about the Russian Revolution in India
Among those the Russian Revolution inspired were many Indians. Several
attended the Communist University. By the mid-1920s the Communist Party was
formed in India. Its members kept in touch with the Soviet Communist Party.
Important Indian political and cultural figures took an interest in the Soviet
experiment and visited Russia, among them Jawaharlal Nehru and Rabindranath
Tagore, who wrote about Soviet Socialism. In India, writings gave impressions of
Soviet Russia. In Hindi, R.S. Avasthi wrote in 1920-21 Russian Revolution, Lenin,
His Life and His Thoughts, and later The Red Revolution . S.D. Vidyalankar
wrote The Rebirth of Russia and The Soviet State of Russia. There was much
that was written in Bengali, Marathi, Malayalam, Tamil and Telugu.
Fig.20 – Special Issue on
Lenin of the Indo-Soviet
Journal.
Indian communists
mobilised support for the
USSR during the Second
World War.
2022-23
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
47
Source G
Source F
An Indian arrives in Soviet Russia in 1920
‘For the first time in our lives, we were seeing Europeans
mixing freely with Asians. On seeing the Russians mingling
freely with the rest of the people of the country we were
convinced that we had come to a land of real equality.
We saw freedom in its true light. In spite of their poverty,
imposed by the counter-revolutionaries and the imperialists,
the people were more jovial and satisfied than ever before.
The revolution had instilled confidence and fearlessness in
them. The real brotherhood of mankind would be seen here
among these people of fifty different nationalities. No
barriers of caste or religion hindered them from mixing freely
with one another. Every soul was transformed into an orator.
One could see a worker, a peasant or a soldier haranguing
like a professional lecturer.’
Shaukat Usmani, Historic Trips of a Revolutionary.
Rabindranath Tagore wrote from Russia in 1930
‘Moscow appears much less clean than the other
European capitals. None of those hurrying along the
streets look smart. The whole place belongs to the
workers … Here the masses have not in the least been
put in the shade by the gentlemen … those who lived in
the background for ages have come forward in the open
today … I thought of the peasants and workers in my
own country. It all seemed like the work of the Genii in
the Arabian Nights. [here] only a decade ago they were
as illiterate, helpless and hungry as our own masses …
Who could be more astonished than an unfortunate Indian
like myself to see how they had removed the mountain of
ignorance and helplessness in these few years’.