page 84
1 How were the Lives of People Affected?
Foresters and villagers had very different ideas of what a good forest
should look like. Villagers wanted forests with a mixture of species
to satisfy different needs – fuel, fodder, leaves. The forest department
on the other hand wanted trees which were suitable for building
New words
Scientific forestry – A system of cutting
trees controlled by the forest department,
in which old trees are cut and new ones
planted
ships or railways. They needed trees that could provide hard wood,
and were tall and straight. So particular species like teak and sal were
promoted and others were cut.
In forest areas, people use forest products – roots, leaves, fruits, and
tubers – for many things. Fruits and tubers are nutritious to eat,
especially during the monsoons before the harvest has come in. Herbs
are used for medicine, wood for agricultural implements like yokes
and ploughs, bamboo makes excellent fences and is also used to make
baskets and umbrellas. A dried scooped-out gourd can be used as a
portable water bottle. Almost everything is available in the forest –
leaves can be stitched together to make disposable plates and cups,
the siadi (Bauhinia vahlii) creeper can be used to make ropes, and the
thorny bark of the semur (silk-cotton) tree is used to grate vegetables.
Oil for cooking and to light lamps can be pressed from the fruit of
the mahua tree.
The Forest Act meant severe hardship for villagers across the country.
After the Act, all their everyday practices – cutting wood for their
Fig.12 – Collecting mahua ( Madhuca indica) from the forests.
Villagers wake up before dawn and go to the forest to collect the mahua flowers which have fallen on the forest floor. Mahua
trees are precious. Mahua flowers can be eaten or used to make alcohol. The seeds can be used to make oil.
Fig.13 – Drying tendu leaves.
The sale of tendu leaves is a major source of
income for many people living in forests. Each
bundle contains approximately 50 leaves, and if a
person works very hard they can perhaps collect
as many as 100 bundles in a day. Women,
children and old men are the main collectors.
2022-23
India and the Contemporary World
86
houses, grazing their cattle, collecting fruits and roots, hunting and
fishing – became illegal. People were now forced to steal wood
from the forests, and if they were caught, they were at the mercy of
the forest guards who would take bribes from them. Women who
collected fuelwood were especially worried. It was also common for
police constables and forest guards to harass people by demanding
free food from them