page 96
 Pastoral Nomads and their Movements 
1.1 In the Mountains
Even today the Gujjar Bakarwals of Jammu and Kashmir are great
herders of goat and sheep. Many of them migrated to this region in
the nineteenth century in search of pastures for their animals.
Gradually, over the decades, they established themselves in the area,
and moved annually between their summer and winter grazing
grounds. In winter, when the high mountains were covered with
snow, they lived with their herds in the low hills of the Siwalik
range. The dry scrub forests here provided pasture for their herds.
By the end of April they began their northern march for their summer
grazing grounds. Several households came together for this journey,
forming what is known as a kafila. They crossed the Pir Panjal passes
and entered the valley of Kashmir. With the onset of summer, the
snow melted and the mountainsides were lush green. The variety of
grasses that sprouted provided rich nutritious forage for the animal
herds. By end September the Bakarwals were on the move again, this
time on their downward journey, back to their winter base. When
the high mountains were covered with snow, the herds were grazed
in the low hills.
In a different area of the mountains, the Gaddi shepherds of
Himachal Pradesh had a similar cycle of seasonal movement. They
too spent their winter in the low hills of Siwalik range, grazing their
flocks in scrub forests. By April they moved north and spent the
summer in Lahul and Spiti. When the snow melted and the high
passes were clear, many of them moved on to higher mountainmeadows. By September they began their return movement. On the
way they stopped once again in the villages of Lahul and Spiti, reaping
their summer harvest and sowing their winter crop. Then they descended
with their flock to their winter grazing ground on the Siwalik hills.
Next April, once again, they began their march with their goats and
sheep, to the summer meadows.
Further to the east, in Garhwal and Kumaon, the Gujjar cattle herders
came down to the dry forests of the bhabar in the
winter, and went up to the high meadows – the
bugyals – in summer. Many of them were
originally from Jammu and came to the UP hills in
the nineteenth century in search of good pastures.
This pattern of cyclical movement between summer
and winter pastures was typical of many pastoral
communities of the Himalayas, including the
Bhotiyas, Sherpas and Kinnauris. All of them had
to adjust to seasonal changes and make effective use
of available pastures in different places. When the
pasture was exhausted or unusable in one place they
moved their herds and flock to new areas. This
continuous movement also allowed the pastures to
recover; it prevented their overuse.
