page 100
1.2 On the Plateaus, Plains and Deserts
Not all pastoralists operated in the mountains. They were also to be
found in the plateaus, plains and deserts of India.
Dhangars were an important pastoral community of Maharashtra.
In the early twentieth century their population in this region was
estimated to be 467,000. Most of them were shepherds, some were
blanket weavers, and still others were buffalo herders. The Dhangar
shepherds stayed in the central plateau of Maharashtra during the
monsoon. This was a semi-arid region with low rainfall and poor
soil. It was covered with thorny scrub. Nothing but dry crops like
bajra could be sown here. In the monsoon this tract became a vast
grazing ground for the Dhangar flocks.
 By October the Dhangars
harvested their bajra and started on their move west. After a march
of about a month they reached the Konkan. This was a flourishing
agricultural tract with high rainfall and rich soil. Here the shepherdswere welcomed by Konkani peasants. After the kharif harvest was
cut at this time, the fields had to be fertilised and made ready for the
rabi harvest. Dhangar flocks manured the fields and fed on the
stubble. The Konkani peasants also gave supplies of rice which the
shepherds took back to the plateau where grain was scarce. With the
onset of the monsoon the Dhangars left the Konkan and the coastal
areas with their flocks and returned to their settlements on the dry
plateau. The sheep could not tolerate the wet monsoon conditionsIn Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, again, the dry central plateau was
covered with stone and grass, inhabited by cattle, goat and sheep
herders. 
The Gollas herded cattle. The Kurumas and Kurubas reared
sheep and goats and sold woven blankets. They lived near the woods,
cultivated small patches of land, engaged in a variety of petty trades
and took care of their herds. Unlike the mountain pastoralists, it
was not the cold and the snow that defined the seasonal rhythms of
their movement: rather it was the alternation of the monsoon and
dry season. In the dry season they moved to the coastal tracts, and
left when the rains came. Only buffaloes liked the swampy, wet
conditions of the coastal areas during the monsoon months. Other
herds had to be shifted to the dry plateau at this time.
Banjaras were yet another well-known group of graziers. They were
to be found in the villages of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. 
In search of good pastureland
for their cattle, they moved over long distances, selling plough cattle
and other goods to villagers in exchange for grain and fodderIn the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas. The rainfall in
the region was meagre and uncertain. On cultivated land,
harvests fluctuated every year. Over vast stretches no crop
could be grown. So the Raikas combined cultivation with
pastoralism. During the monsoons, the Raikas of Barmer,
Jaisalmer, Jodhpur and Bikaner stayed in their home villages,
where pasture was available. By October, when these grazing
grounds were dry and exhausted, they moved out in search
of other pasture and water, and returned again during the
next monsoon. One group of Raikas – known as the Maru
(desert) Raikas – herded camels and another group reared
sheep and goat.
So we see that the life of these pastoral groups was sustained by a
careful consideration of a host of factors. They had to judge how
long the herds could stay in one area, and know where they could
find water and pasture. They needed to calculate the timing of their
movements, and ensure that they could move through different
territories. They had to set up a relationship with farmers on the
way, so that the herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the
soil. They combined a range of different activities – cultivation, trade,
and herding – to make their living.
How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule?
