page 104
Under colonial rule, the life of pastoralists changed dramatically. Source C
Their grazing grounds shrank, their movements were regulated,
and the revenue they had to pay increased. Their agricultural stock
declined and their trades and crafts were adversely affected. How?
First, the colonial state wanted to transform all grazing lands
into cultivated farms. Land revenue was one of the main sources
of its finance. By expanding cultivation it could increase its revenue
collection. It could at the same time produce more jute, cotton,
wheat and other agricultural produce that were required in
England. To colonial officials all uncultivated land appeared to
be unproductive: it produced neither revenue nor agricultural
produce. It was seen as ‘waste land’ that needed to be brought
under cultivation. From the mid-nineteenth century, Waste Land
Rules were enacted in various parts of the country. By these Rules
uncultivated lands were taken over and given to select individuals.
These individuals were granted various concessions and encouraged
to settle these lands. Some of them were made headmen of villages
in the newly cleared areas. In most areas the lands taken over
were actually grazing tracts used regularly by pastoralists. So
expansion of cultivation inevitably meant the decline of pastures
and a problem for pastoralists.
Second, by the mid-nineteenth century, various Forest Acts were
also being enacted in the different provinces. Through these Acts
some forests which produced commercially valuable timber like
deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’. No pastoralist was allowed
access to these forests. Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’.
In these, some customary grazing rights of pastoralists were
granted but their movements were severely restricted. The
colonial officials believed that grazing destroyed the saplings and
young shoots of trees that germinated on the forest floor. The
herds trampled over the saplings and munched away the shoots.
This prevented new trees from growing.
These Forest Acts changed the lives of pastoralists. They were
now prevented from entering many forests that had earlier
provided valuable forage for their cattle. Even in the areas they
were allowed entry, their movements were regulated. They needed
a permit for entry. The timing of their entry and departure was
specified, and the number of days they could spend in the forest Source D
was limited. Pastoralists could no longer remain in an area even if
forage was available, the grass was succulent and the undergrowth
in the forest was ample. They had to move because the Forest
Department permits that had been issued to them now ruled their
lives. The permit specified the periods in which they could be
legally within a forest. If they overstayed they were liable to fines.
Third, British officials were suspicious of nomadic people. They
distrusted mobile craftsmen and traders who hawked their goods
in villages, and pastoralists who changed their places of residence
every season, moving in search of good pastures for their herds.
The colonial government wanted to rule over a settled population.
They wanted the rural people to live in villages, in fixed places
with fixed rights on particular fields. Such a population was easy
to identify and control. Those who were settled were seen as
peaceable and law abiding; those who were nomadic were
considered to be criminal. In 1871, the colonial government in
India passed the Criminal Tribes Act. By this Act many
communities of craftsmen, traders and pastoralists were classified
as Criminal Tribes. They were stated to be criminal by nature
and birth. Once this Act came into force, these communities were
expected to live only in notified village settlements. They were
not allowed to move out without a permit. The village police
kept a continuous watch on them.
Fourth, to expand its revenue income, the colonial government
looked for every possible source of taxation. So tax was imposed
on land, on canal water, on salt, on trade goods, and even on
animals. Pastoralists had to pay tax on every animal they grazed
on the pastures. In most pastoral tracts of India, grazing tax was
introduced in the mid-nineteenth century. The tax per head of
cattle went up rapidly and the system of collection was made
increasingly efficient. In the decades between the 1850s and 1880s
the right to collect the tax was auctioned out to contractors. These
contractors tried to extract as high a tax as they could to recover
the money they had paid to the state and earn as much profit as
they could within the year. By the 1880s the government began
collecting taxes directly from the pastoralists. Each of them was
given a pass. To enter a grazing tract, a cattle herder had to show
the pass and pay the tax. The number of cattle heads he had and
the amount of tax he paid was entered on the pass.

