page 109
3.1 Where have the Grazing Lands Gone?
One of the problems the Maasais have faced is the continuous loss of
their grazing lands. Before colonial times, Maasailand stretched over
a vast area from north Kenya to the steppes of northern Tanzania.
In the late nineteenth century, European imperial powers scrambled
for territorial possessions in Africa, slicing up the region into different
colonies. In 1885, Maasailand was cut into half with an international
boundary between British Kenya and German Tanganyika.
Subsequently, the best grazing lands were gradually taken over for
white settlement and the Maasai were pushed into a small area in south Kenya and north Tanzania. The Maasai lost about 60 per cent
of their pre-colonial lands. They were confined to an arid zone with
uncertain rainfall and poor pastures.
From the late nineteenth century, the British colonial government
in east Africa also encouraged local peasant communities to expand
cultivation. As cultivation expanded, pasturelands were turned into
cultivated fields. In pre-colonial times, the Maasai pastoralists had
dominated their agricultural neighbours both economically and
politically. By the end of colonial rule the situation had reversed.
Large areas of grazing land were also turned into game reserves like
the Maasai Mara and Samburu National Park in Kenya and Serengeti
Park in Tanzania. Pastoralists were not allowed to enter these
reserves; they could neither hunt animals nor graze their herds in
these areas. Very often these reserves were in areas that had
traditionally been regular grazing grounds for Maasai herds. The
Serengeti National Park, for instance, was created over 14,760 km.
of Maasai grazing land
The loss of the finest grazing lands and water resources created
pressure on the small area of land that the Maasai were confined
within. Continuous grazing within a small area inevitably meant a
deterioration of the quality of pastures. Fodder was always in short
supply. Feeding the cattle became a persistent problem
