Page 54-55
The Years of Depression
The years between 1924 and 1928 saw some stability. Yet this was
built on sand. German investments and industrial recovery were
totally dependent on short-term loans, largely from the USA. This
support was withdrawn when the Wall Street Exchange crashed in
1929. Fearing a fall in prices, people made frantic efforts to sell their
shares. On one single day, 24 October, 13 million shares were sold.
This was the start of the Great Economic Depression. Over the next
three years, between 1929 and 1932, the national income of the USA
fell by half. Factories shut down, exports fell, farmers were badly hit
and speculators withdrew their money from the market. The effects
of this recession in the US economy were felt worldwide.
The German economy was the worst hit by the economic crisis. By
1932, industrial production was reduced to 40 per cent of the 1929
level. Workers lost their jobs or were paid reduced wages. The number
of unemployed touched an unprecedented 6 million. On the streets
of Germany you could see men with placards around their necks
saying, ‘Willing to do any work’. Unemployed youths played cards
or simply sat at street corners, or desperately queued up at the local
employment exchange. As jobs disappeared, the youth took to
criminal activities and total despair became commonplace.
The economic crisis created deep anxieties and fears in people. The
middle classes, especially salaried employees and pensioners, saw
their savings diminish when the currency lost its value. Small
businessmen, the self-employed and retailers suffered as their
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
55
businesses got ruined. These sections of society were filled with the
fear of proletarianisation, an anxiety of being reduced to the ranks
of the working class, or worse still, the unemployed. Only organised
workers could manage to keep their heads above water, but
unemployment weakened their bargaining power. Big business was
in crisis. The large mass of peasantry was affected by a sharp fall in
agricultural prices and women, unable to fill their children’s
stomachs, were filled with a sense of deep despair.
Politically too the Weimar Republic was fragile. The Weimar
constitution had some inherent defects, which made it unstable
and vulnerable to dictatorship. One was proportional
representation. This made achieving a majority by any one party a
near impossible task, leading to a rule by coalitions. Another defect
was Article 48, which gave the President the powers to impose
emergency, suspend civil rights and rule by decree. Within its short
life, the Weimar Republic saw twenty different cabinets lasting on
an average 239 days, and a liberal use of Article 48. Yet the crisis
could not be managed. People lost confidence in the democratic
parliamentary system, which seemed to offer no solutions.