Page 58
The Destruction of Democracy
On 30 January 1933, President Hindenburg offered the
Chancellorship, the highest position in the cabinet of ministers, to
Hitler. By now the Nazis had managed to rally the conservatives to
their cause. Having acquired power, Hitler set out to dismantle the
structures of democratic rule. A mysterious fire that broke out in
the German Parliament building in February facilitated his move.
The Fire Decree of 28 February 1933 indefinitely suspended civic
rights like freedom of speech, press and assembly that had been
guaranteed by the Weimar constitution. Then he turned on his arch-
enemies, the Communists, most of whom were hurriedly packed off
to the newly established concentration camps. The repression of
the Communists was severe. Out of the surviving 6,808 arrest files
of Duesseldorf, a small city of half a million population, 1,440 were
those of Communists alone. They were, however, only one among
the 52 types of victims persecuted by the Nazis across the country.
On 3 March 1933, the famous Enabling Act was passed. This Act
established dictatorship in Germany. It gave Hitler all powers to
sideline Parliament and rule by decree. All political parties and trade
unions were banned except for the Nazi Party and its affiliates. The
state established complete control over the economy, media, army
and judiciary.
Special surveillance and security forces were created to control and
order society in ways that the Nazis wanted. Apart from the already
existing regular police in green uniform and the SA or the Storm
Troopers, these included the Gestapo (secret state police), the SS (the
protection squads), criminal police and the Security Service (SD). It
was the extra-constitutional powers of these newly organised forces
that gave the Nazi state its reputation as the most dreaded criminal
state. People could now be detained in Gestapo torture chambers,
rounded up and sent to concentration camps, deported at will or
arrested without any legal procedures. The police forces acquired
powers to rule with impunity.