Page 66
Youth in Nazi Germany
Hitler was fanatically interested in the youth of the country. He felt
that a strong Nazi society could be established only by teaching children
Nazi ideology. This required a control over the child both inside and
outside school.
What happened in schools under Nazism? All schools were ‘cleansed’
and ‘purified’. This meant that teachers who were Jews or seen as
‘politically unreliable’ were dismissed. Children were first segregated:
Germans and Jews could not sit together or play together.
Subsequently, ‘undesirable children’ – Jews, the physically handicapped,
Gypsies – were thrown out of schools. And finally in the 1940s, they
were taken to the gas chambers.
‘Good German’ children were subjected to a process of Nazi schooling,
a prolonged period of ideological training. School textbooks were
rewritten. Racial science was introduced to justify Nazi ideas of race.
Stereotypes about Jews were popularised even through maths classes.
Children were taught to be loyal and submissive, hate Jews, and worship
Hitler. Even the function of sports was to nurture a spirit of violence
and aggression among children. Hitler believed that boxing could make
children iron hearted, strong and masculine.
Youth organisations were made responsible for educating German
youth in the ‘the spirit of National Socialism’. Ten-year-olds had to
enter Jungvolk. At 14, all boys had to join the Nazi youth organisation
– Hitler Youth – where they learnt to worship war, glorify aggression
and violence, condemn democracy, and hate Jews, communists, Gypsies
and all those categorised as ‘undesirable’. After a period of rigorous
ideological and physical training they joined the Labour Service, usually
at the age of 18. Then they had to serve in the armed forces and enter
one of the Nazi organisations.
The Youth League of the Nazis was founded in 1922. Four years later
it was renamed Hitler Youth. To unify the youth movement under
Nazi control, all other youth organisations were systematically dissolved
and finally banned.