page 26,27
1.2 Industrial Society and Social Change
These political trends were signs of a new time. It was a time of
profound social and economic changes. It was a time when new cities
came up and new industrialised regions developed, railways expanded
and the Industrial Revolution occurred.
Industrialisation brought men, women and children to factories. Work
hours were often long and wages were poor. Unemployment was
common, particularly during times of low demand for industrial goods.
Housing and sanitation were problems since towns were growing
rapidly. Liberals and radicals searched for solutions to these issues.
New words
Suffragette movement – A movement to
give women the right to vote.

Almost all industries were the property of individuals. Liberals and
radicals themselves were often property owners and employers.
Having made their wealth through trade or industrial ventures, they
felt that such effort should be encouraged – that its benefits would
be achieved if the workforce in the economy was healthy and citizens
were educated. Opposed to the privileges the old aristocracy had by
birth, they firmly believed in the value of individual effort, labour
and enterprise. If freedom of individuals was ensured, if the poor
could labour, and those with capital could operate without restraint,
they believed that societies would develop. Many working men and
women who wanted changes in the world rallied around liberal and
radical groups and parties in the early nineteenth century.
Some nationalists, liberals and radicals wanted revolutions to put an
end to the kind of governments established in Europe in 1815. In
France, Italy, Germany and Russia, they became revolutionaries and
worked to overthrow existing monarchs. Nationalists talked of
revolutions that would create ‘nations’ where all citizens would have
Fig.1 – The London poor in the mid-nineteenth century as seen by a
contemporary.
From: Henry Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor, 1861.
2022-23
India and the Contemporary World
28
Activity
equal rights. After 1815, Giuseppe Mazzini, an Italian nationalist, conspired
with others to achieve this in Italy. Nationalists elsewhere – including India
– read his writings