page 29
1.4 Support for Socialism
By the 1870s, socialist ideas spread through Europe. To coordinate
their efforts, socialists formed an international body – namely, the
Second International.
Workers in England and Germany began forming associations to
fight for better living and working conditions. They set up funds to
help members in times of distress and demanded a reduction of working
hours and the right to vote. In Germany, these associations worked closely
with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) and helped it win parliamentary
seats. By 1905, socialists and trade unionists formed a Labour Party in
Britain and a Socialist Party in France. However, till 1914, socialists never
succeeded in forming a government in Europe. Represented by strong
figures in parliamentary politics, their ideas did shape legislation, but
governments continued to be run by conservatives, liberals and radicals.

Fig.2 – This is a painting of the Paris Commune of 1871 (From Illustrated London News, 1871). It portrays a scene from the
popular uprising in Paris between March and May 1871. This was a period when the town council (commune) of Paris was
taken over by a ‘peoples’ government’ consisting of workers, ordinary people, professionals, political activists and others.
The uprising emerged against a background of growing discontent against the policies of the French state. The ‘Paris
Commune’ was ultimately crushed by government troops but it was celebrated by Socialists the world over as a prelude to a
socialist revolution.The Paris Commune is also popularly remembered for two important legacies: one, for its association with
the workers’ red flag – that was the flag adopted by the communards ( revolutionaries) in Paris; two, for the ‘Marseillaise’,
originally written as a war song in 1792, it became a symbol of the Commune and of the struggle for liberty.
2022-23
India and the Contemporary World
page 30
2 The Russian Revolution
In one of the least industrialised of European states this situation was
reversed. Socialists took over the government in Russia through the
October Revolution of 1917. The fall of monarchy in February 1917
and the events of October are normally called the Russian Revolution.
How did this come about? What were the social and political
conditions in Russia when the revolution occurred? To answer these
questions, let us look at Russia a few years before the revolution.