page 33
2.5 The First World War and the Russian Empire
In 1914, war broke out between two European alliances – Germany,
Austria and Turkey (the Central powers) and France, Britain and
Russia (later Italy and Romania). Each country had a global empire
New words
Jadidists – Muslim reformers within the
Russian empire
Real wage – Reflects the quantities of
goods which the wages will actually buy.
Why were there revolutionary disturbances in
Russia in 1905? What were the demands of
revolutionaries?
2022-23
India and the Contemporary World
page 34
Activity
The year is 1916. You are a general in the
Tsar’s army on the eastern front. You are
writing a report for the government in
Moscow. In your report suggest what you
think the government should do to improve
the situation.
Fig.7 – Russian soldiers during the First
World War.
The Imperial Russian army came to be known
as the ‘Russian steam roller’. It was the
largest armed force in the world. When this
army shifted its loyalty and began supporting
the revolutionaries, Tsarist power collapsed.
and the war was fought outside Europe as well as
in Europe. This was the First World War.
In Russia, the war was initially popular and people
rallied around Tsar Nicholas II. As the war
continued, though, the Tsar refused to consult the
main parties in the Duma. Support wore thin. AntiGerman sentiments ran high, as can be seen in the
renaming of St Petersburg – a German name – as
Petrograd. The Tsarina Alexandra’s German
origins and poor advisers, especially a monk called
Rasputin, made the autocracy unpopular.
The First World War on the ‘eastern front’ differed
from that on the ‘western front’. In the west, armies
fought from trenches stretched along eastern
France. In the east, armies moved a good deal and
fought battles leaving large casualties. Defeats were
shocking and demoralising. Russia’s armies lost
badly in Germany and Austria between 1914 and
1916. There were over 7 million casualties by 1917.
As they retreated, the Russian army destroyed
crops and buildings to prevent the enemy from
being able to live off the land. The destruction of
crops and buildings led to over 3 million refugees in Russia. The
situation discredited the government and the Tsar. Soldiers did not
wish to fight such a war.
The war also had a severe impact on industry. Russia’s own industries
were few in number and the country was cut off from other suppliers
of industrial goods by German control of the Baltic Sea. Industrial
equipment disintegrated more rapidly in Russia than elsewhere in
Europe. By 1916, railway lines began to break down. Able-bodied
men were called up to the war. As a result, there were labour shortages
and small workshops producing essentials were shut down. Large
supplies of grain were sent to feed the army. For the people in the
cities, bread and flour became scarce. By the winter of 1916, riots at
bread shops were common.
