page 36
3.1 After February
Army officials, landowners and industrialists were influential in
the Provisional Government. But the liberals as well as socialists
among them worked towards an elected government. Restrictions
on public meetings and associations were removed. ‘Soviets’, like
the Petrograd Soviet, were set up everywhere, though no common
system of election was followed.
In April 1917, the Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin returned to
Russia from his exile. He and the Bolsheviks had opposed the war
since 1914. Now he felt it was time for soviets to take over power.
He declared that the war be brought to a close, land be transferred
to the peasants, and banks be nationalised. These three demands
were Lenin’s ‘April Theses’. He also argued that the Bolshevik Party
rename itself the Communist Party to indicate its new radical aims.
Most others in the Bolshevik Party were initially surprised by the
April Theses. They thought that the time was not yet ripe for a
Look again at Source A and Box 1.
Ø List five changes in the mood of the
workers.
Ø Place yourself in the position of a woman
who has seen both situations and write
an account of what has changed.
2022-23
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
37
socialist revolution and the Provisional Government needed to be
supported. But the developments of the subsequent months changed
their attitude.
Through the summer the workers’ movement spread. In industrial
areas, factory committees were formed which began questioning
the way industrialists ran their factories. Trade unions grew in
number. Soldiers’ committees were formed in the army. In June,
about 500 Soviets sent representatives to an All Russian Congress
of Soviets. As the Provisional Government saw its power reduce
and Bolshevik influence grow, it decided to take stern measures
against the spreading discontent. It resisted attempts by workers
to run factories and began arresting leaders. Popular
demonstrations staged by the Bolsheviks in July 1917 were sternly
repressed. Many Bolshevik leaders had to go into hiding or flee.
Meanwhile in the countryside, peasants and their Socialist
Revolutionary leaders pressed for a redistribution of land. Land
committees were formed to handle this. Encouraged by the
Socialist Revolutionaries, peasants seized land between July and
September 1917