page 44
4.3 Stalinism and Collectivisation
The period of the early Planned Economy was linked to
the disasters of the collectivisation of agriculture. By 1927-
1928, the towns in Soviet Russia were facing an acute
problem of grain supplies. The government fixed prices
at which grain must be sold, but the peasants refused to sell their
grain to government buyers at these prices.
Stalin, who headed the party after the death of Lenin, introduced
firm emergency measures. He believed that rich peasants and traders
in the countryside were holding stocks in the hope of higher prices.
Speculation had to be stopped and supplies confiscated.
In 1928, Party members toured the grain-producing areas, supervising
enforced grain collections, and raiding ‘kulaks’ – the name for wellto-do peasants. As shortages continued, the decision was taken to
collectivise farms. It was argued that grain shortages were partly due
to the small size of holdings. After 1917, land had been given over to
peasants. These small-sized peasant farms could not be modernised.
To develop modern farms, and run them along industrial lines with
machinery, it was necessary to ‘eliminate kulaks’, take away land
from peasants, and establish state-controlled large farms.
What followed was Stalin’s collectivisation programme. From 1929,
the Party forced all peasants to cultivate in collective farms (kolkhoz).
The bulk of land and implements were transferred to the ownership
of collective farms. Peasants worked on the land, and the kolkhoz
profit was shared. Enraged peasants resisted the authorities and
destroyed their livestock. Between 1929 and 1931, the number of
cattle fell by one-third. Those who resisted collectivisation were
severely punished. Many were deported and exiled. As they resisted
collectivisation, peasants argued that they were not rich and they
were not against socialism. They merely did not want to work in
collective farms for a variety of reasons. Stalin’s government allowed
some independent cultivation, but treated such cultivators
unsympathetically.
In spite of collectivisation, production did not increase immediately.
In fact, the bad harvests of 1930-1933 led to one of most devastating
famines in Soviet history when over 4 million died.
Fig.18 – A poster during collectivisation. It
states: ‘We shall strike at the kulak working for
the decrease in cultivation.’
Fig.19 – Peasant women being gathered to
work in the large collective farms.
New words
Deported – Forcibly removed from one’s own country.
Exiled – Forced to live away from one’s own country.
2022-23
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
45
Source E
Official view of the opposition to collectivisation and the government response
‘From the second half of February of this year, in various regions of the Ukraine
… mass insurrections of the peasantry have taken place, caused by distortions
of the Party’s line by a section of the lower ranks of the Party and the Soviet
apparatus in the course of the introduction of collectivisation and preparatory
work for the spring harvest.
Within a short time, large scale activities from the above-mentioned regions
carried over into neighbouring areas – and the most aggressive insurrections
have taken place near the border.
The greater part of the peasant insurrections have been linked with outright
demands for the return of collectivised stocks of grain, livestock and tools …
Between 1st February and 15th March, 25,000 have been arrested … 656 have
been executed, 3673 have been imprisoned in labour camps and 5580 exiled …’
Report of K.M. Karlson, President of the State Police Administration of the Ukraine
to the Central Committee of the Communist Party, on 19 March 1930.
From: V. Sokolov (ed), Obshchestvo I Vlast, v 1930-ye gody
Source D
This is a letter written by a peasant who did not want to join the collective farm.
To the newspaper Krestianskaia Gazeta (Peasant Newspaper)
‘… I am a natural working peasant born in 1879 … there are 6 members in my
family, my wife was born in 1881, my son is 16, two daughters 19, all three go
to school, my sister is 71. From 1932, heavy taxes have been levied on me that
I have found impossible. From 1935, local authorities have increased the taxes
on me … and I was unable to handle them and all my property was registered:
my horse, cow, calf, sheep with lambs, all my implements, furniture and my
reserve of wood for repair of buildings and they sold the lot for the taxes. In
1936, they sold two of my buildings … the kolkhoz bought them. In 1937, of two
huts I had, one was sold and one was confiscated …’
Afanasii Dedorovich Frebenev, an independent cultivator.
From: V. Sokolov (ed), Obshchestvo I Vlast, v 1930-ye gody.