page 78
The disappearance of forests is referred to as deforestation.
Deforestation is not a recent problem. The process began many
centuries ago; but under colonial rule it became more systematic and
extensive. Let us look at some of the causes of deforestation in India.
1.1 Land to be Improved
In 1600, approximately one-sixth of India’s landmass was under
cultivation. Now that figure has gone up to about half. As population
increased over the centuries and the demand for food went up,
peasants extended the boundaries of cultivation, clearing forests and
breaking new land. In the colonial period, cultivation expanded
rapidly for a variety of reasons. First, the British directly encouraged
1 Why Deforestation?
Fig.2 – When the valleys were full. Painting by John Dawson.
Native Americans like the Lakota tribe who lived in the Great North American Plains had a diversified economy. They
cultivated maize, foraged for wild plants and hunted bison. Keeping vast areas open for the bison to range in was seen by
the English settlers as wasteful. After the 1860s the bisons were killed in large numbers.
2022-23
 Forest Society and Colonialism
79
Source A
The idea that uncultivated land had to
be taken over and improved was popular
with colonisers everywhere in the world.
It was an argument that justified
conquest.
In 1896 the American writer, Richard
Harding, wrote on the Honduras in
Central America:
‘There is no more interesting question of
the present day than that of what is to
be done with the world’s land which is
lying unimproved; whether it shall go to
the great power that is willing to turn it
to account, or remain with its original
owner, who fails to understand its value.
The Central Americans are like a gang of
semi-barbarians in a beautifully furnished
house, of which they can understand
neither its possibilities of comfort nor its
use.’
Three years later the American-owned
United Fruit Company was founded, and
grew bananas on an industrial scale in
Central America. The company acquired
such power over the governments of
these countries that they came to be
known as Banana Republics.
Quoted in David Spurr, The Rhetoric of
Empire, (1993).
the production of commercial crops like jute, sugar, wheat and
cotton. The demand for these crops increased in nineteenth-century
Europe where foodgrains were needed to feed the growing urban
population and raw materials were required for industrial
production. Second, in the early nineteenth century, the colonial
state thought that forests were unproductive. They were considered
to be wilderness that had to be brought under cultivation so that
the land could yield agricultural products and revenue, and enhance
the income of the state. So between 1880 and 1920, cultivated area
rose by 6.7 million hectares.
We always see the expansion of cultivation as a sign of progress.
But we should not forget that for land to be brought under the
plough, forests have to be cleared