page 83
The Rise of Commercial Forestry
In the previous section we have seen that the British needed forests
in order to build ships and railways. The British were worried that
the use of forests by local people and the reckless felling of trees by
traders would destroy forests. So they decided to invite a German
expert, Dietrich Brandis, for advice, and made him the first Inspector
General of Forests in India.
Brandis realised that a proper system had to be introduced to manage
the forests and people had to be trained in the science of conservation.
This system would need legal sanction. Rules about the use of forest
resources had to be framed. Felling of trees and grazing had to be
restricted so that forests could be preserved for timber production.
Anybody who cut trees without following the system had to be
2 The Rise of Commercial Forestry
Fig.9 – One aisle of a managed poplar forest
in Tuscany, Italy.
Poplar forests are good mainly for timber.
They are not used for leaves, fruit or other
products. Look at the straight lines of trees,
all of a uniform height. This is the model that
‘scientific’ forestry has promoted.
Activity
If you were the Government of India in 1862
and responsible for supplying the railways
with sleepers and fuel on such a large scale,
what were the steps you would have taken?
2022-23
India and the Contemporary World
84
New words
Scientific forestry – A system of cutting
trees controlled by the forest department,
in which old trees are cut and new ones
planted
punished. So Brandis set up the Indian Forest Service in 1864 and
helped formulate the Indian Forest Act of 1865. The Imperial Forest
Research Institute was set up at Dehradun in 1906. The system they
taught here was called ‘scientific forestry’. Many people now,
including ecologists, feel that this system is not scientific at all.
In scientific forestry, natural forests which had lots of different types
of trees were cut down. In their place, one type of tree was planted
in straight rows. This is called a plantation. Forest officials surveyed
the forests, estimated the area under different types of trees, and
made working plans for forest management. They planned how much
of the plantation area to cut every year. The area cut was then to be
replanted so that it was ready to be cut again in some years.
After the Forest Act was enacted in 1865, it was amended twice,
once in 1878 and then in 1927. The 1878 Act divided forests into
three categories: reserved, protected and village forests. The best
forests were called ‘reserved forests’. Villagers could not take anything
from these forests, even for their own use. For house building or
fuel, they could take wood from protected or village forests.
