page 86
2.2 How did Forest Rules Affect Cultivation?
One of the major impacts of European colonialism was on the practice
of shifting cultivation or swidden agriculture. This is a traditional
agricultural practice in many parts of Asia, Africa and South America. It
has many local names such as lading in Southeast Asia, milpa in Central
America, chitemene or tavy in Africa, and chena in Sri Lanka. In
India, dhya, penda, bewar, nevad, jhum, podu, khandad and kumri
are some of the local terms for swidden agriculture.
In shifting cultivation, parts of the forest are cut and burnt in rotation.
Seeds are sown in the ashes after the first monsoon rains, and the crop is
harvested by October-November. Such plots are cultivated for a couple
of years and then left fallow for 12 to 18 years for the forest to grow
back. A mixture of crops is grown on these plots. In central India
and Africa it could be millets, in Brazil manioc, and in other parts of
Latin America maize and beans.
European foresters regarded this practice as harmful for the forests. They
felt that land which was used for cultivation every few years could not
grow trees for railway timber. When a forest was burnt, there was
the added danger of the flames spreading and burning valuable timber.
Activity
Children living around forest areas can often
identify hundreds of species of trees and plants.
How many species of trees can you name?
Fig.14 – Bringing grain from the threshing
grounds to the field.
The men are carrying grain in baskets from the
threshing fields. Men carry the baskets slung
on a pole across their shoulders, while women
carry the baskets on their heads.
Fig.15 – Taungya cultivation was a system in
which local farmers were allowed to cultivate
temporarily within a plantation. In this photo
taken in Tharrawaddy division in Burma in
1921 the cultivators are sowing paddy. The
men make holes in the soil using long bamboo
poles with iron tips. The women sow paddy
in each hole.
2022-23
 Forest Society and Colonialism
87
Shifting cultivation also made it harder for the government to calculate
taxes. Therefore, the government decided to ban shifting cultivation.
As a result, many communities were forcibly displaced from their
homes in the forests. Some had to change occupations, while some
resisted through large and small rebellions.