page 91
2 The Fears of the People
When the colonial government proposed to reserve two-thirds of
the forest in 1905, and stop shifting cultivation, hunting and collection
of forest produce, the people of Bastar were very worried. Some
villages were allowed to stay on in the reserved forests on the condition
that they worked free for the forest department in cutting and
transporting trees, and protecting the forest from fires. Subsequently,
these came to be known as ‘forest villages’. People of other villages
were displaced without any notice or compensation. For long,
villagers had been suffering from increased land rents and frequent
demands for free labour and goods by colonial officials. Then came
the terrible famines, in 1899-1900 and again in 1907-1908. Reservations
proved to be the last straw.
People began to gather and discuss these issues in their village councils,
in bazaars and at festivals or wherever the headmen and priests of
several villages were assembled. The initiative was taken by the
Dhurwas of the Kanger forest, where reservation first took place.
Although there was no single leader, many people speak of Gunda
Dhur, from village Nethanar, as an important figure in the
movement. In 1910, mango boughs, a lump of earth, chillies and
arrows, began circulating between villages. These were actually
messages inviting villagers to rebel against the British. Every village
contributed something to the rebellion expenses. Bazaars were looted,
the houses of officials and traders, schools and police stations were
burnt and robbed, and grain redistributed. Most of those who were
attacked were in some way associated with the colonial state and its
oppressive laws. William Ward, a missionary who observed the events,
wrote: ‘From all directions came streaming into Jagdalpur, police,
merchants, forest peons, schoolmasters and immigrants.
The British sent troops to suppress the rebellion. The adivasi leaders
tried to negotiate, but the British surrounded their camps and fired
upon them. After that they marched through the villages flogging
and punishing those who had taken part in the rebellion. Most
villages were deserted as people fled into the jungles. It took three
months (February - May) for the British to regain control. However,
they never managed to capture Gunda Dhur. In a major victory
for the rebels, work on reservation was temporarily suspended,
and the area to be reserved was reduced to roughly half of that
planned before 1910.
The story of the forests and people of Bastar does not end there.
After Independence, the same practice of keeping people out of the
forests and reserving them for industrial use continued. In the 1970s,
the World Bank proposed that 4,600 hectares of natural sal forest
should be replaced by tropical pine to provide pulp for the paper
industry. It was only after protests by local environmentalists that
the project was stopped.
Let us now go to another part of Asia, Indonesia, and see what was
happening there over the same period.