page 93
Java is now famous as a rice-producing island in Indonesia. But
once upon a time it was covered mostly with forests. The colonial
power in Indonesia were the Dutch, and as we will see, there were
many similarities in the laws for forest control in Indonesia and
India. Java in Indonesia is where the Dutch started forest
management. Like the British, they wanted timber from Java to
build ships. In 1600, the population of Java was an estimated 3.4
million. There were many villages in the fertile plains, but there
were also many communities living in the mountains and practising
shifting cultivation.
4.1 The Woodcutters of Java
The Kalangs of Java were a community of skilled forest cutters and
shifting cultivators. They were so valuable that in 1755 when the
Mataram kingdom of Java split, the 6,000 Kalang families were
equally divided between the two kingdoms. Without their expertise,
it would have been difficult to harvest teak and for the kings to
build their palaces. When the Dutch began to gain control over the
forests in the eighteenth century, they tried to make the Kalangs
work under them. In 1770, the Kalangs resisted by attacking a Dutch
fort at Joana, but the uprising was suppressed
4.2 Dutch Scientific Forestry
In the nineteenth century, when it became
important to control territory and not just
people, the Dutch enacted forest laws in Java,
restricting villagers’ access to forests. Now
wood could only be cut for specified purposes
like making river boats or constructing houses,
and only from specific forests under close
supervision. Villagers were punished for
grazing cattle in young stands, transporting
wood without a permit, or travelling on forest
roads with horse carts or cattle.
As in India, the need to manage forests for
shipbuilding and railways led to the
4 Forest Transformations in Java
introduction of a forest service. In 1882, 280,000 sleepers were Source G
exported from Java alone. However, all this required labour to cut
the trees, transport the logs and prepare the sleepers. The Dutch
first imposed rents on land being cultivated in the forest and then
exempted some villages from these rents if they worked collectively
to provide free labour and buffaloes for cutting and transporting
timber. This was known as the blandongdiensten system. Later, instead
of rent exemption, forest villagers were given small wages, but their
right to cultivate forest land was restricted.
4.3 Samin’s Challenge
Around 1890, Surontiko Samin of Randublatung village, a teak forest
village, began questioning state ownership of the forest. He argued that
the state had not created the wind, water, earth and wood, so it could not
own it. Soon a widespread movement developed. Amongst those who
helped organise it were Samin’s sons-in-law. By 1907, 3,000 families
were following his ideas. Some of the Saminists protested by lying down
on their land when the Dutch came to survey it, while others refused to
pay taxes or fines or perform labour.
4.4 War and Deforestation
The First World War and the Second World War had a major impact
on forests. In India, working plans were abandoned at this time, and
the forest department cut trees freely to meet British war needs. In
Java, just before the Japanese occupied the region, the Dutch followed
‘a scorched earth’ policy, destroying sawmills, and burning huge
piles of giant teak logs so that they would not fall into Japanese
hands. The Japanese then exploited the forests recklessly for their
own war industries, forcing forest villagers to cut down forests.
Many villagers used this opportunity to expand cultivation in the
forest. After the war, it was difficult for the Indonesian forest service
to get this land back. As in India, people’s need for agricultural land
has brought them into conflict with the forest department’s desire
to control the land and exclude people from it.4.5 New Developments in Forestry
Since the 1980s, governments across Asia and Africa have begun to
see that scientific forestry and the policy of keeping forest
communities away from forests has resulted in many conflicts.
Conservation of forests rather than collecting timber has become a
more important goal. The government has recognised that in order
to meet this goal, the people who live near the forests must be
involved. In many cases, across India, from Mizoram to Kerala, dense
forests have survived only because villages protected them in sacred
groves known as sarnas, devarakudu, kan, rai, etc. Some villages have
been patrolling their own forests, with each household taking it in
turns, instead of leaving it to the forest guards. Local forest
communities and environmentalists today are thinking of different
forms of forest management.
