page 106
2.1 How Did these Changes Affect the Lives of Pastoralists?
These measures led to a serious shortage of pastures. When grazing
lands were taken over and turned into cultivated fields, the available
area of pastureland declined. Similarly, the reservation of forests
meant that shepherds and cattle herders could no longer freely pasture
their cattle in the forests.
As pasturelands disappeared under the plough, the existing animal
stock had to feed on whatever grazing land remained. This led to
continuous intensive grazing of these pastures. Usually nomadic
pastoralists grazed their animals in one area and moved to another
area. These pastoral movements allowed time for the natural
restoration of vegetation growth. When restrictions were imposed
on pastoral movements, grazing lands came to be continuously used
and the quality of patures declined. This in turn created a further
shortage of forage for animals and the deterioration of animal stock.
Underfed cattle died in large numbers during scarcities and famines 2.2 How Did the 
Pastoralists Cope with these 
Changes?
Pastoralists reacted to these changes in a variety of ways. Some
reduced the number of cattle in their herds, since there was not
enough pasture to feed large numbers. Others discovered new
pastures when movement to old grazing grounds became difficult.
After 1947, the camel and sheep herding Raikas, for instance, could
no longer move into Sindh and graze their camels on the banks of
the Indus, as they had done earlier. The new political boundaries
between India and Pakistan stopped their movement. So they had
to find new places to go. In recent years they have been migrating
to Haryana where sheep can graze on agricultural fields after the
harvests are cut. This is the time that the fields need manure that
the animals provide.
Over the years, some richer pastoralists began buying land and
settling down, giving up their nomadic life. Some became settled
peasants cultivating land, others took to more extensive trading.
Many poor pastoralists, on the other hand, borrowed money from
moneylenders to survive. At times they lost their cattle and sheep
and became labourers, working on fields or in small towns.
Yet, pastoralists not only continue to survive, in many regions
their numbers have expanded over recent decades. When
pasturelands in one place was closed to them, they changed the
direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined
pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the
changes in the modern world. Many ecologists believe that in dry
regions and in the mountains, pastoralism is still ecologically the
most viable form of life.
Such changes were not experienced only by pastoral communities
in India. In many other parts of the world, new laws and settlement
patterns forced pastoral communities to alter their lives. How did
pastoral communities elsewhere cope with these changes in the
modern world?
