page 112
3.2 The Borders are Closed
In the nineteenth century, African pastoralists could move over vast
areas in search of pastures. When the pastures were exhausted in one
place they moved to a different area to graze their cattle. From the
late nineteenth century, the colonial government began imposing
various restrictions on their mobility.
Like the Maasai, other pastoral groups were also forced to live within
the confines of special reserves. The boundaries of these reserves
became the limits within which they could now move. They were
not allowed to move out with their stock without special permits.
And it was difficult to get permits without trouble and harassment.
Those found guilty of disobeying the rules were severely punished.
Pastoralists were also not allowed to enter the markets in white areas.
In many regions, they were prohibited from participating in any
form of trade. White settlers and European colonists saw pastoralists
as dangerous and savage – people with whom all contact had to be
minimised. Cutting off all links was, however, never really possible,
because white colonists had to depend on black labour to bore mines
and, build roads and towns.
The new territorial boundaries and restrictions imposed on them
suddenly changed the lives of pastoralists. This adversely affected both their pastoral and trading activities. Earlier, pastoralists not
only looked after animal herds but traded in various products. The
restrictions under colonial rule did not entirely stop their trading
activities but they were now subject to various restrictions.
3.3 When Pastures Dry
Drought affects the life of pastoralists everywhere. When rains fail
and pastures are dry, cattle are likely to starve unless they can be
moved to areas where forage is available. That is why, traditionally,
pastoralists are nomadic; they move from place to place. This
nomadism allows them to survive bad times and avoid crises.
But from the colonial period, the Maasai were bound down to a
fixed area, confined within a reserve, and prohibited from moving
in search of pastures. They were cut off from the best grazing lands
and forced to live within a semi-arid tract prone to frequent droughts.
Since they could not shift their cattle to places where pastures were
available, large numbers of Maasai cattle died of starvation and disease
in these years of drought. An enquiry in 1930 showed that the Maasai
in Kenya possessed 720,000 cattle, 820,000 sheep and 171,000 donkeys.
In just two years of severe drought, 1933 and 1934, over half the
cattle in the Maasai Reserve died.
As the area of grazing lands shrank, the adverse effect of the droughts
increased in intensity. The frequent bad years led to a steady decline
of the animal stock of the pastoralists.
3.4 Not All were Equally Affected
In Maasailand, as elsewhere in Africa, not all pastoralists were equally
affected by the changes in the colonial period. In pre-colonial times
Maasai society was divided into two social categories – elders and
warriors. The elders formed the ruling group and met in periodic
councils to decide on the affairs of the community and settle disputes.
The warriors consisted of younger people, mainly responsible for
the protection of the tribe. They defended the community and
organised cattle raids. Raiding was important in a society where cattle
was wealth. It is through raids that the power of different pastoral
groups was asserted. Young men came to be recognised as members
of the warrior class when they proved their manliness by raiding
the cattle of other pastoral groups and participating in wars. They,
however, were subject to the authority of the elders To administer the affairs of the Maasai, the British introduced
a series of measures that had important implications. They
appointed chiefs of different sub-groups of Maasai, who were
made responsible for the affairs of the tribe. The British
imposed various restrictions on raiding and warfare.
Consequently, the traditional authority of both elders and
warriors was adversely affected.
The chiefs appointed by the colonial government often
accumulated wealth over time. They had a regular income with
which they could buy animals, goods and land. They lent
money to poor neighbours who needed cash to pay taxes. Many
of them began living in towns, and became involved in trade.
Their wives and children stayed back in the villages to look
after the animals. These chiefs managed to survive the
devastations of war and drought. They had both pastoral and
non-pastoral income, and could buy animals when their stock
was depleted.
But the life history of the poor pastoralists who depended only
on their livestock was different. Most often, they did not have
the resources to tide over bad times. In times of war and famine,
they lost nearly everything. They had to go looking for work
in the towns. Some eked out a living as charcoal burners, others
did odd jobs. The lucky could get more regular work in road
or building construction.
The social changes in Maasai society occurred at two levels.
First, the traditional difference based on age, between the elders and warriors, was disturbed, though it did not break down
entirely. Second, a new distinction between the wealthy and poor
pastoralists developed. and warriors, was disturbed, though it did not break down
entirely. Second, a new distinction between the wealthy and poor
pastoralists developed.
