Page 14
France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
The situation in France continued to be tense during the following years.
Although Louis XVI had signed the Constitution, he entered into secret
negotiations with the King of Prussia. Rulers of other neighbouring
countries too were worried by the developments in France and made
plans to send troops to put down the events that had been taking place
there since the summer of 1789. Before this could happen, the National
Assembly voted in April 1792 to declare war against Prussia and Austria.
Thousands of volunteers thronged from the provinces to join the army.
They saw this as a war of the people against kings and aristocracies all
over Europe. Among the patriotic songs they sang was the Marseillaise,
composed by the poet Roget de L’Isle. It was sung for the first time by
volunteers from Marseilles as they marched into Paris and so got its
name. The Marseillaise is now the national anthem of France.
The revolutionary wars brought losses and economic difficulties
to the people. While the men were away fighting at the front,
women were left to cope with the tasks of earning a living and
looking after their families. Large sections of the population were
convinced that the revolution had to be carried further, as the
Constitution of 1791 gave political rights only to the richer sections
of society. Political clubs became an important rallying point for
people who wished to discuss government policies and plan their
own forms of action. The most successful of these clubs was that of
the Jacobins, which got its name from the former convent of St
Jacob in Paris. Women too, who had been active throughout this
period, formed their own clubs. Section 4 of this chapter will tell
you more about their activities and demands.
The members of the Jacobin club belonged mainly to the less
prosperous sections of society. They included small shopkeepers,
artisans such as shoemakers, pastry cooks, watch-makers, printers,
as well as servants and daily-wage workers. Their leader was
Maximilian Robespierre. A large group among the Jacobins decided
to start wearing long striped trousers similar to those worn by
dock workers. This was to set themselves apart from the fashionable
sections of society, especially nobles, who wore knee breeches. 
